docs: added custom components (#1910)
genesiscommunitysuccess/docs: docs/001_develop/03_client-capabilities/023_custom-components/05_directives.mdx

title: 'directives'
sidebar_label: 'Directives'
id: directives
keywords: [
    Template Directives, 
    Reactive Templates,
    Conditional Rendering,
    List Rendering,
    Dynamic Content,
    DOM References,
    Slot Management,
    Data Synchronization,
    Element Binding
]
tags:
  - ref
  - slotted
  - children
  - when
  - whenElse
  - repeat
  - sync
  - Template Binding
  - Conditional Directives
  - Dynamic Directives
sidebar_position: 3
---

# Directives

> Directives in Genesis Elements are special attributes or decorators that add specific functionality to the template or component logic. Below is a summary of commonly used directives:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Directives in Genesis Elements are special functions used in the templates that add specific functionality. Below is a summary of commonly used directives:
```

  buttonElement: HTMLButtonElement;

  connectedCallback() {
    super.connectedCallback();
    console.log("Button text:", this.buttonElement.textContent); // Button text: Click Me
  }
}
```

##### Key Points:

>- `ref("buttonElement")`: The `ref` directive creates a reference to the `<button>` element and assigns it to the `buttonElement` property of `<my-button>` component instance, allowing direct interaction with the DOM element.

>- In `connectedCallback`, `this.buttonElement` is a direct reference to the `<button>` DOM node, allowing us to access properties like `textContent`. Here, we log the button’s text to the console.

:::note

Even though the `<button>` element is part of our `<my-button>` component’s template, you can’t directly access DOM elements inside the template without a reference. The `ref` directive provides this direct access, allowing you to manipulate or retrieve information from a specific DOM element.

:::

#### Syntax breakdown

```typescript
ref(propertyName);
```

- Property Name: The name of the property that will store the DOM reference in the component. The element with `ref(propertyName)` will be assigned to this property.

> ### Slotted

Reviewer: Rereading this has made me remember what my previous comment was that we were confused by. I think that it isn't great that the first time we introduce the concept of slots is here in the directives section, I think they're a bit more fundamental and could go in the quickstart guide. However I think leave that for now and come back to it after the 5th

>- The second template (the button) is then rendered with the message: "Data Loaded: Hello, Genesis!".

#### Syntax Breakdown

```typescript
whenElse(condition, trueTemplate, falseTemplate);
```

>- `condition`: A boolean expression that determines which template to render.
>- `trueTemplate`: The template rendered if the condition evaluates to true.
>- `falseTemplate`: The template rendered if the condition evaluates to false.

### Repeat

The `repeat` directive is used to dynamically render a list of items. This directive is highly useful for rendering lists, especially when you need to manage and display data dynamically.

`<my-button-list>` will display a static list of button labels, each rendered as a button. This example shows how to use `repeat` to render each item in the list.

```typescript
import {
  GenesisElement,
  customElement,
  html,
  repeat,
} from "@genesislcap/web-core";

@customElement({
  name: "my-button-list",
  template: html<MyButtonList>` 
    <h2>Button List</h2>
    <ul>
      ${repeat(
        (x) => x.buttons, // Data source: the buttons array
        // item represents each button label in the array

>         // index ensures each item can have a unique identifier if needed
>         (item, index) =>
>           html`<li><button>${item}</button></li>` // Template generator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        // index ensures each item can have a unique identifier if needed
        // If you wish you can annotate the type parameter on the inner `html`
        // block here too. Here it's `string` which matches the variable in the array
        // that `repeat` is iterating over
        (item, index) =>
          html<string>`<li><button>${item}</button></li>` // Template generator
```

#### View Recycling

View recycling determines whether previously rendered DOM elements are reused when the array changes.

:::note

By default, `repeat` enables view recycling to optimize performance, especially for large lists.

:::

**_Recycling Enabled (recycle: true):_**

The `repeat` directive may reuse DOM elements that have already been rendered for array items.
This improves performance by avoiding unnecessary DOM creation and destruction.

**_Recycling Disabled (recycle: false):_**

All views are discarded and recreated whenever the array changes.

Let's look at an example without recycling:

```typescript
<ul>
  $
  {repeat((x) => x.buttons, html<string>`<li>${(x) => x}</li>`, {
    recycle: false,
  })}
</ul>
```

#### Syntax breakdown

```typescript
repeat(expression, itemTemplate, options);
```

>- `expression`: Specifies the data source for repeat.
>- `itemTemplate`: Defines the HTML structure for each item.
>- `options` (optional):
  >>- `positioning: true`: Enables index and positional metadata like `index`, `isFirst`, and `isLast`.
  >>- `recycle: false`: Prevents view recycling for cases where re-initializing DOM elements is required.

### Sync

> The `sync` directive enables two-way data binding between the model (component state) and the view (template). Unlike one-way data binding, where data flows only from the model to the view, the `sync` directive ensures that changes in the view (e.g., user interaction) automatically update the model, keeping both synchronized.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `sync` directive enables two-way data binding between the model (component state) and the view (template). Unlike one-way data binding, where data flows only from the model to the view, the `sync` directive ensures that changes in the view (e.g. user interaction) automatically update the model, keeping both synchronized.
```

```typescript
import {
  GenesisElement,
  customElement,
  observable,
  html,
  sync,
} from "@genesislcap/web-core";

@customElement({
  name: "my-checkbox",
  template: html<MyCheckbox>`
    <div>
      <label>
        <input
          type="checkbox"
          ?checked=${sync((x) => x.isSelected, "boolean")}
        />
        Enable Feature
      </label>
    </div>
  `,
})
export class MyCheckbox extends GenesisElement {
  @observable isSelected = true;

  isSelectedChanged() {
    console.log(`isSelected changed to: ${this.isSelected}`);
  }
}
```

##### Key Points:

>- The `isSelected` property sets the initial state of the checkbox (checked = true).
>- When the user toggles the checkbox, the `isSelected` property is updated automatically.
>- The `isSelectedChanged` method is triggered whenever the property changes, logging the new state to the console.

##### Using Sync with Multiple Input Types

The `sync` directive works seamlessly with various input types, such as text fields, number fields, and checkboxes.

```typescript
@customElement({
  name: "my-form",
  template: html<MyForm>`
    <div>
      <label>
        Text:

>         <input type="text" :value=${sync((x) => x.textValue)} /> // for text inputs, the default behavior of sync is already optimized for strings
>       </label>
>     </div>
>     <div>
>       <label>
>         Number:
>         <input type="number" :value=${sync((x) => x.numberValue, "number")} />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        <input type="text" value=${sync((x) => x.textValue)} /> // for text inputs, the default behavior of sync is already optimized for strings
      </label>
    </div>
    <div>
      <label>
        Number:
        <input type="number" value=${sync((x) => x.numberValue, "number")} />
```
